---
published: true
layout: post
title: Fog of War Reflection
author: nhlasley
---

The juxtaposition of reminiscences by the elderly Robert McNamara alongside historical film footage, tape recordings, and photographs in *The Fog of War* offers a compelling critique of American technocracy in the twentieth century.  Although the term is never explicitly used in the film, technocracy can be loosely defined as a system of power characterized by a heavy reliance upon technology to gather data which is then interpreted and which forms the basis for all decisions.  McNamara's reflections on the technocratic praxis of the American Military reveal the conceptual shortcomings thereof.  His cumulative experience with data-derived decisions during World War II, the Cold War, and Vietnam is a precaution against exclusive reliance upon data as a source of authority.  

Of particular interest to this class are the lessons recounted in *The Fog of War* that have implications for historical methodology which incorporates data as argumentative evidence.  The first of these is that conclusions drawn from data alone are problematic.  This is because the human interpretation is often overlooked in the jump to the conclusion.  A poignant example of this was the difficulty in confirming the torpedo attacks during the Gulf of Tonkin Incident in the 1960s.  The radar instruments aboard a US submarine detected slight frequencies associated with torpedo attacks, and without a second thought, the human operators concluded that the submarine was being fired upon.  In hindsight, there were no torpedoes, and an error was made because of faulty human interpretation.  Similarly, the historian should be very much aware of the limitations of data and thoroughly consider all possible explanations for a particular set of data before incorporating it into her research.

An insight of even greater magnitude is that data, by its very nature, precludes all interpretive possibilities involving ethical dilemmas or moral values.  The devastating firebomb campaign of Japan during WWII was a calculated decision based on a "guideline of proportionality," (i.e., a higher ratio of civilians killed per square mile bombed.) In retrospect however, the staggering loss of civilian life is a sobering reality despite the ultimate American victory, and points to the fact that ethical complexities are inherently resistant to numerical quantification, and as such cannot be factored into technocratic decision making in its purest form.  Likewise, when constructing a historical narrative, the scholar should carefully weigh the opposing explanatory mechanisms of agency and structure and avoid an exclusive preference to one over the other.

McNamara's statement near the conclusion of the film that it is "beyond the human mind to comprehend all the variables" is a concise summary of the lessons that *The Fog of War* can teach historians practicing in the age of the Digital Humanities.  The historian, wherever his situation in place and time, should never lose sight of the reality that conclusions about narrative -- whether supported by interpretations of data, or drawn in the conventional manner of research of primary sources -- are open to revision and re-evaluation from another perspective and that to pretend otherwise is a disservice to both himself and the scholarly community.
