---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Let's quickly progress beyond the threshold"
author: charleswalton2013
---


A long time ago, I remember playing my friend’s PlayStation. We were really young so I don’t remember much, but I do remember sitting extremely close to the TV. After several hours, his mom made us stop. She told us, “staring at a screen for too long will make your eyes ‘go-bad,’ now go outside and play basketball.” In reality, we were too young to be playing basketball with the older kids, so I just sat around wondering how a screen could make your eyes ‘go-bad’—whatever that meant. It did not really matter because my eyes continued to get worse year after year. Every time I read an online assignment, I think back to those days and laugh. Now, in 2013, we are all confronting this new monster—digitized technology. 

There is no going back to the time when mothers could threaten inactive children in hopes of getting them away from a computer. It is now necessary to learn how to understand and manipulate this technology and use it in more innovative ways in this increasingly globalized society. 

In my opinion, the arts and humanities are in the same position they have been for the past two centuries—the defensive. Because of the success the sciences have had with technology, it is imperative for us as historians to learn to use digital technology in our favor—or else, we shall perish. We are at a point in our species’ existence that causes society and the powers that be to value the decoding of the human genome more than the historical processes that enabled it to be understood. Scientists at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (as well as the US government) are more concerned with replacing the new Titan because of China’s newer and faster supercomputer than they are with the Appalachian poverty that is practically walking distance from their labs. Humanists and social scientists now have the ability to access this same sort of technology; we must begin to use it to not only advance our fields, but also our species as a whole. 

The scholars included in the JAH article on the promise of digital history made several valuable points, but also left much left unanswered. They do a wonderful job explaining what exactly DH is today and the tasks the field is currently working on. One of the most important, and soon to be obvious, points made in the article is Daniel Cohen’s statement of abundance. Typically, there should not be a problem with having abundance of something you need, but as Cohen points out, struggling and sifting through these materials will prove to be a challenge. Michael Frisch also added some very valuable ideas. He noted that it is the tools digital historians use that are most important, not the emerging field or title given to oneself. It is this toolbox that will equip humanists and social scientists to continue to advance our species’ understanding of its history. 

Technology, by nature, is not stagnant. It is constantly in motion as users continue to master and advance it at a faster pace than before. Thus, we are all students of digital technology. It is for us to decide how we shall utilize it because there is no avoiding it. We cannot wait for history to slowly decide what it wants to do with DH; instead, we should push it to the forefront and solidify its role in the historical field. This is an area in which the scholars in the JAH article could have expanded upon further. As Dr. Black said in our first discussion, we will make many mistakes throughout this process. It is up for us to decide how to learn from those mistakes before discarding them and jumping right back into the pool. As we progress through the semester, we should constantly take notice of our digital surroundings and our progress. Use the tools provided to not only ask the critical questions, but also answer them—that is what we are here for, right? 
