---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Hot and Cold Meida:  What Happened to Luke Warm?"
author: mattblaylock
---

Understanding Media

Marshall McLuhan’s seminal work on media, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, certainly has much to offer a course on the digital humanities.  Not the least of which is his comment that “the media is the message.”  Poignant as it was in the 1960s, when McLuhan coined the phrase, this simple response to the multiple ways messages can be related seems even more applicable today.  That’s the real wealth of McLuhan’s work, it ability to evolve with new forms of media.  

Consider our discussion last class period on the way the computer has changed our relationship to thinking and writing.  This is a perfect extension of “the media is the message.”  The very act of changing the form, be it from paper to typewriter, typewriter to computer, and then from Microsoft word to note, alters how we think about writing in itself.  If the simple switch in media requires a new intellectually exercise to take place, the reception of ideas must follow the same process.

This is not the only worthy idea of out McLuhan’s work, but it is certainly the easiest, and possibly, most well thought out.  In fact, much of McLuhan’s ideas seem little more than his stream of consciousness opinions about media.  The result is a lack of cohesion between points, a lack of support for each point made, and ultimately leaving a reader with more questions than answers.   In “Why Bother with Marshall McLuhan” Alan Jacob perhaps best summarizes McLuhan’s work when he comments, “First, that McLuhan never made arguments, only assertions. Second, that those assertions are usually wrong, and when they are not wrong they are highly debatable. Third, that McLuhan had an uncanny instinct for reading and quoting scholarly books that would become field-defining classics.”  

Jacob’s statement seems particularly revealing when applied to McLuhan’s categorization of media as either “hot” or “cold.”  McLuhan explains that “hot media are, therefore, low in participation, and cool media are high in participation or completion by the audience.”  This central feature of McLuhan’s argument is problematic for all the reasons Jacobs addresses.  First, McLuhan does not bother to really explain to readers how this categorization of media developed, but rather asserts its usefulness and truth.  This leads McLuhan into a long explanation of each media and why it is either hot or cold.  Because McLuhan’s theory lacks any testable characteristics on which to classify media, the reader has no way of really understanding McLuhan’s opinions.  The reader must simply accept or deny them.  
This relates to Jacob’s claim that McLuhan’s work is either usually wrong or debatable.  In consideration of “hot” and “cold” media, both seem to be true.  McLuhan is simply wrong by not providing a quantitative means of determining these categories.  However, his idea still has merit, but it lacks refinement.  Most troubling is his tendency to lump people and their responses to media together.  McLuhan oversimplifies human characteristics as he develops media characteristics.  Therefore, his argument of “hot” and “cold” media is reliant on objective reactions from all people to all types of media.  This just isn’t realistic.  Anyone’s reactions to media are overwhelmingly subjective, making all media “hot” and “cold” based on who’s engaged with it.  Because individuals bring with them their own histories, ideas, intellect, experience, etc., their participation in media varies greatly.  This is ignored in McLuhan’s theory of “hot” and “cold.”  It lacks the nuance of human experience.  In fact, why can’t there be a luke warm media?  Why is McLuhan set on the dichotomies of experience?

If McLuhan’s work seems to display not only this problem, but others as well, why would this post begin by championing him as a leader of media studies?  The answer seems to lie in McLuhan’s ability to not necessarily get the answers to all the questions about media correct, but his penchant for at least landing on the right question.  In this way, McLuhan has inspired others to consider his own ideas and develop their own.  Again, Jacob’s explains this quality of McLuhan’s work writing, “Much of what McLuhan wrote came an instant too soon, and perhaps that’s the best reason to read him, infuriating and confusing though that experience may be. To read McLuhan is to gain at least an inkling of what it might be like to look around the next corner of history.”

