---
published: true
layout: post
title: Petzold Code
author: nhlasley
---

This week's assigned reading greatly differed from others thus far.  The basic presentation of objective concepts such as Morse code, electrical circuits, voltage, relays and base two counting -- all of which are enumerated in the early chapters of Petzold's Code -- were a welcome relief to the "stream-of-consciousness" dialogues of McLuhan and the proliferation of rabbit trails and obscure academic references found in Manovich.  However, the level of technicality following the explanation of logic gates was too great for me to follow completely.  Despite a significant investment of time and effort, I still feel incapable of explaining, in my own words exactly how an 8-bit-adder works.  I showed the electrical diagrams in Code and in How Computers Work to my good friend, a 3rd year electrical engineering major, and he assured me that the schematics were highly advanced even for students in his own field.

But supposing I grasped all the details of Code, a further difficulty lies in choosing the best course in which to lead the discussion.  Unlike McLuhan and Manovich, who make more dubious claims and assertions than one can shake a stick at, the objective enumeration of circuitry, relays, boolean logic, gates, etc. in Code is not open for debate.  

One approach that seems particularly appealing is to assess the limits and potentials of digital technology and the implications thereof for the practitioner of history and/or the digital humanities.  Petzold himself hints at one such limitation when discussing the nature of information capable of being rendered in digital format:  > "Any information that can be reduced to a choice among two or more possibilities can be expressed using bits. Needless to say, there are plenty of forms of human communication that do not represent choices among discrete possibilities and that are also vital to our existence…If you can't express something in words, pictures, or sounds, you're not going to be able to encode the information in bits. Nor would you want to" (72).  After a close reading of the book, this quote stands out above all as the most substantial with respect to the nature of our class.  On the one hand, Petzold's explanations of code flesh out in great detail Manovich's emphasis on the modularity and numerical representation as the basis for all new media.  This in turn, strengthens Manovich's claim that databases are particularly suited to the digital environment. At the same time however, this quote calls into question the value of a database full of words, pictures, and sounds, without any interpretive analysis.  If the historian's unique contribution to the humanities general endeavor to make sense of the world and by studying how changes take place over time, then there is a need for analysis that cannot be expressed in the terms of boolean logic.

The second limitation that Petzold's book left unspoken (but one that was raised in the first weeks reading by Cohen and Rosenzweig) was that of durability.  If an entire database, at the most basic level is really just a string of 0's and 1's, it seems like there are all kinds of unprecedented dangers unique to digital technology.  For instance, take a print journal article vs. that same article as a .pdf file stored on a flash drive.  Given storage in a cool, dry, dark place, the journal article is likely to remain in good condition for hundreds of years, while the data on the flash drive will likely begin corrupt within a few years, not to mention the flash drive faces the potential of becoming obsolete.  While the computational power of circuitry is staggering, their fragility with respect to information storage is equally so.  For the historian, who relies on primary sources, this means that the of digital technology has with it a whole number of preservation concerns, all of which stem from its fundamental binary nature.