---
published: true
layout: post
title: "The Fog of War: Logic vs Order"
author: jtomlin1
---


The Fog of War: Logic vs Order

The issue of Technocracy, as laid out in The Fog of War, is more complicated than it seems at face value. I think this is because under the surface, it's constituent parts are at times contradictory and even self-defeating. At an introductory level, Technocratic approaches to problems seek to apply data-driven logic, order, and efficiency in order to arrive at timely and appropriate resolutions/solutions. Great, this sounds reasonable and effective. But we should reconsider some of the subordinate elements to this systematic approach to unsystematic and isolated events. One of the items purportedly gained through a technocratic approach to warfare, for instance, is the doctrine of proportionality. Proportionality is derived from what is hailed as a distinctly western way of warfare, where just or legal war is predicated upon the idea that force is used in ways directly proportionate to the enemy's threat, their use of force, and the ultimate goal of ending/winning the conflict. In this way, proportionality is about order-seeking to provide a sense of order and organization to a business that, as Macnamarra pointed out, is inherently chaotic and unpredictable. 

And yet how does the technocrat provide proportionality? In Mcnamarra's case they do it through data-driven decision making. Looking at the rate of successful sortie's out of the total flown; rating the effectiveness of fire-bombing over different types of cities/structures; categorizing soldier's on their battle experience, equipment, commanders, etc. so as to maximize effectiveness and alertness. But this is not actually order being ascribed, but rather logic. It is an assumption that a logical understanding of the situation can and will lead to the ordered use of violence in the most effective, and manageable, way. But do logic and order always coincide or even intersect? often yes, but not necessarily always. For instance, a proportionate response in the face of an enemy who does not fight with the same restriction logically means that a proportionate response is ever escalating. This defeats order. Conversely, a strict adherence to an ordered approach to violence necessitates abandoning the rule of proportionality where data proves a disproportionate response, such as atom bombing, can end the conflict prematurely and "more safely". 

Okay, so technocracy is not without its caveats and contradictions. So what? In terms of abstraction this means a reliance on data-driven knowledge that can often distort what is knowable and real. A computer using python can use order to count the number of times "python" appears in the paragraph, but it cannot use logic to decipher between "python" and "python," in its count or "understand" that such a distinction is not useful. Ultimately, what is knowable has layers, and each do not necessarily have a real connection to the others. Mapping literary genres can tell us about broader connections that the data "sees" , applying order to a seemingly chaotic landscape. And yet, at times that order distorts the reality of the genres themselves; as Moretti lamented " promoting patterns and relationships from the bird's eye view that don't exist on the ground "human" level. If Mcnamarra is proof of anything, it is that a loyalty to what one sees as a prevailing logic and order can completely blind the individual to core truths that might be more logical than the solutions which order and data suggest. Here, again, I come back to the admonition I provided about the pilgrim to the megalopolis and the position of the humanities in a digital, data-reliant world. We must learn to see what digital abstraction of data and information provides us without devolving into the safe but deceptive assumption that it is always the greatest arbiter of truth, narrative, and, ultimately, power over information. 
