---
published: true
layout: post
title: Unfogging history
author: charleswalton2013
---

##Fog of War
> As the United States is now discovering, orthodox military methods are quite beside the point: bombs don’t work unless there is something other than paddies to make craters in. The ‘official’ or foreign forces soon realize that the only way to fight guerrillas is by attacking their base, i.e. the civilian population. . . . The US forces, with their usual taste for solving social problems by technological means, appear to have a preference for destroying everything over large areas, presumably in the hope either that all guerrillas in the area will be killed along with the rest of the human, animal and vegetable life, or that somehow all those trees and underbrush will be vaporized, leaving the guerrillas standing up and visible, where they can be bombed like real soldiers.”  

-Eric Hobsbawm. [Vietnam and the Dynamics of Guerrilla War](http://newleftreview.org/I/33/eric-hobsbawm-vietnam-and-the-dynamics-of-guerrilla-war). New Left Review. 1965

From Berkeley and Harvard to Ford. From World War II to Vietnam. From commendable (?) departure to the World Bank. Those are the political highlights and low points of former US Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s long life. The Fog of War: Eleven Lessons from the Life of Robert S. McNamara is a film dedicated to describing the complexity of modern warfare. In the beginning of the film, as McNamara was reflecting on the Cold War, he stated, >It’s almost impossible for our people to put themselves back into that period. I doubt this is truly the case. Instead, I think this is McNamara’s way of recognizing the absurdity of certain aspects of the Cold War and his role in them. McNamara’s expertise led him to the top of both controlling realms of modern capitalist society—business and politics. It is his involvement in the latter, however, that causes one to question the role in which technology should play in decision making processes, especially regarding warfare. The US involvement in WWII, particularly Japan, and its later involvement in Vietnam, demonstrated the horrendous implications when decision-making processes are left to the technocratic elite and their tech-benighted political counterparts, i.e., Lyndon Baines Johnson and others. 

After the industrial revolution in England and the political revolutions in the US and France in the 18th century, philosophical and scientific thought experienced more advancement than ever before. This process was intensified in the 19th century as many scientists sought to incorporate objectivity into their works. This new mode of scientific thought coupled well with the idea of maximizing efficiency and eliminating the ‘unnecessary.’  It seems obvious how all of these characteristics would become desirable to the political system, especially in a century experiencing more conflict than any other in human history. 

This creates a problem for historians and the historical method. McNamera’s reflection on the US-Japanese War was one of the most vivid of the film. It only took hours to destroy entire cities such as Tokyo with firebombs—and only seconds to destroy Hiroshima and Nagasaki with atomic bombs. This destruction was primarily the result of a few highly trained and intelligent men, perhaps in fancy suits. Decisions to exterminate human lives were made at desks by individuals that understood data, digital abstractions, and etc. very well. The surface of the issue—war and or politics—is one that historians have understood and documented for centuries. The new feature that must be taken on is what lies beneath the old surface—abstraction, data analysis, and other features of technology, especially digital technology and their role in the historical process. The old surfaces such as war and politics help disguise what lies beneath. Necessary human interaction can now be simplified to the point where technical expertise takes over completely. There is nothing natural left in human nature. The masterminds of destruction and genocide can now carry out their objectives with buttons, 1s and 0s. This leaves Tokyo in flames, Vietnamese jungles and their occupants obliterated, and Pakistani, Afghani and Yemeni children dead. 
