---
published: true
layout: post
title: Siding with McLuhan
author: radiationturnips
---


The reading this week reminded me of another book I read in Dr. Burman's Paleography/History of the Book seminar, Nicholas Carr's _The Shallows_. We read it to start the semester in order to introduce the idea that form does matter, something pre-modern historians have slowly begun to realize. Back in the old days manuscripts were mostly thought of as repositories of information that the historian effortlessly transferred from one medium to another. However, in the last few decades historians have realized that the medium itself was often more important than the content it contained, and books were often purchased and cherished the most by people who could not read them. 

However, Carr was not writing about the manuscript. Rather, his book was a warning against our growing reliance on Digital Media. He argued that neuroscience had reached the point that it could begin to track the effect a particular technology had on our brains. According to Carr, digital reading was causing the parts of our brain responsible for deep thinking to atrophy, and society was entering the shallows, a state, in other words, where we consume more media than ever, but only superficially. 

While McLuhan similarly emphasizes the importance of the medium, where he differs, I think, is that there is no inherent moral judgment in arguing that the medium is the message. He is not claiming that any particular medium is good or bad, or, like Carr, that the type of media consumed will make us either smarter or dumber. Human beings are nothing else if not adaptable, and one of the primary ways that we have adapted through the millenia is through our use of technology. The real danger is that we adapt to technology too quickly, that using it becomes second nature before we've had a chance to consider how it might change us. This is what McLuhan calls the "numbing effect", and at its most simplified his message seems to be rather modest: we need to be intentional and deliberate as we interact with the media and technology which surrounds us. 

In my opinion this message is an important one, and the fact that work like Carr's was published as recently as 2010 indicates that it remains a timely one. Ultimately, this is why I disagree with most of the other posters this week. I don't think he is saying the content -or message if you will- is not important at all. Rather, that the message is what we as human beings are primed -and our brains are designed- to focus on. Recieving the message is second nature, and requires very little work on our part, much like our eyes are designed to notice movement or contrast rather than the static background that is, in fact, the majority of what we "see". If we wanted to make ourselves more aware of this background, it would take real effort and would require a certain amount of prioritization. The medium has to be emphasized by necessity, in other words. 

I think McLuhan's discussioin of war is the most convincing demonstration of this. When war is debated, the issue is usually whether the war is "just" or "unjust", "defensive" or "aggressive". Similarly, weapons are discussed in terms of what they are used for, and who they are used on, rather than the degree to which a new weapon technology changes the very nature of what we are able to do. The very fact that we are fighting the longest war in our history is demonstration of that. We have been able to sustain this war in large part because most of our daily lives are unaffected by it. Drone technology, for example, has allowed us to maintain military action without a huge troop commitment, and the relative precision of the drone has allowed us to target the enemy with less collateral damage than was possible in any previous war. While it is obviously important WHO the drones are targetting -terrorists are always better than civilians-, it is the drone itself-the medium if you will- that has allowed us to sustain a war that would not have been possible without it. If a heavy troop commitment was required, more soldiers were dying, and a draft was implimented, the current level of apathy would dissolve. This is all to say that more than anyone else who posted, I agree with McLuhan, the medium is the message. 
Enter text in [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/). Use the toolbar above, or click the **?** button for formatting help.
