---
published: true
layout: post
title: Time Corpus
author: charleswalton2013
---

## Show and Tell

It took me a while to figure out what I wanted to do for my show and tell post. I have used digital archives and other online resources in the past, but I did not want to make a post dedicated simply to an online database. Many of them, although very useful, are fairly predictable. I think Matt’s post on UNC’s Southern Oral History Program is as interesting they come, given he took advantage of an interesting and interactive database. The databases I have used, however, are not anywhere near as interesting, so I found an alternative resource to post about. 

After playing around with various websites for a while, I finally made my way back to Dr. Black’s website. I needed to know what exactly qualified as a good enough resource to make a post about. Somehow, that led me to Trevor Owens’s website and where I found his old Digital History syllabus. Believe it or not, I looked at nearly all of the tools on his syllabus hoping to find something interesting. In addition to the few familiar resources, there are also some new ones and a couple of games. My favorite, however, was the “Time Corpus,” a tool created credited to Brigham Young University. 

The Time Corpus claims to provide access to all of Time magazine’s text from 1923 to 2006, or 100 million words. Mark Davies, a professor of Corpus Linguistics at BYU created this database. It allows you to search a word or phrase and it shows you how often the word was used in Time magazine broken down decade by decade. The resource points out that this ability allows you to see how the English language has changed over time, including the meaning of words and their popularity. 

Upon first glance, this tool reminded me of the Google Ngram viewer. It allows you to search a word or phrase and documents its popularity over time. My particular research is not necessarily concerned with the changes in the English language over time, but I believe the Time Corpus has more to offer. While playing around with the Time Corpus, I opened another tab so I could simultaneously play with Google’s Ngram. I did a few searches for fun before thinking of key words from my own research that could be searched. When searching the term “Castro,” both databases offer similar graphs with the largest peaks being in the mid-1960s and early 1990s. Searching the term, “communism” also resulted in similar graphs, although Time’s highest peak was in the 1950s, whereas in the Ngram, it was the 1960s. From the 1980s onward, both graphs showed extreme decreases leading up to the present. 

The term ‘panthers” offers a very different result, mainly due to its historical significance. In the Ngram, “panthers” has a very high peak in the 1930s before steadily falling all the way to the 1990s before beginning to peak again. I am sure these peaks have something to do with the animal and nothing to due with the Black Panther Party, the US political organization I imagined would have caused peaks during the 1960s and 1970s. The Time Corpus provided me with exactly what I expected, a very large peak in the early 1970s, followed by a very rapid decline. After you search, the Time Corpus allows you to click on any given decade and provides excerpts from the magazine. As expected, every entry was about the Black Panther Party, whereas the vast majority of the Ngram viewer’s results were concerning the animal. I think this clearly highlights some of the usefulness of being able to limit searches to databases that are more centered on culture and politics instead of the relying solely on the vastness of Google when it comes to our research interests.