---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Academic writing, peer review, and the future of humanities "
author: charleswalton2013
---

## Academic writing, peer review, and the future of humanities 


Townsend’s piece on the future of peer review brings up some very valuable points regarding the digital’s impact on the future of peer review. He correctly states, “The current peer review system promotes conservatism about the form and content of scholarship, and fails to use available technologies to speed up and democratize the system.” Based off our in-class discussion last week and past readings, it seems both the peer review process, and the act of publishing, is overdue for an overhaul. Not only is it becoming clear that academic publishing is little more than a cash cow for many of the companies involved, scholars are willingly, and often excited about, having their labor extracted from them for almost nothing in return. As Townsend explains, the system is broken and it is now time to use the available tools to fix it. 

One challenge to this is the large number of scholars and students who are unfamiliar with digital technology, and their reluctance to learn. Also, the prestige surrounding well-known publishers complicates matters further. How are these obstacles going to be overcome? Will it just be a matter of time? For the latter, it seems as if the field is need of some self-evaluation and it’s not quite clear if elitist values are ever going to be lost in academia. 

Townsend asks some worthy questions in his piece on peer review. In his conclusion, he asks, “should it (a system of post-publication review) give different weights to the opinions of experts in the subject field, other scholarly peers, and the general public?” He also asks, “How can (or should) a system of post-publication review balance the desire for more democratic assessments with the inevitable effects of wider exposure to the varied interests and opinions of the wider public?” Both of these questions are concerned with the democratic process and outcomes of a potential post-publication peer review system. These are, in my opinion, somewhat difficult questions to answer if the end-goal of whatever this hypothetical system is parallel to current peer review and publication process. Do academics simply want to rid themselves of exploitative publish companies, or is the real goal also one that is intrinsically democratic? 

Our book for this week also brings up many valuable issues worth being addressed. The question of whether or not technology can produce a better book, overall, is one of the first questions asked by the authors. They mention collaboration and a transparent process being two of the most beneficial aspects of using technology in the book writing process. The main components to this process are being born digitally, open peer review, and open access. Conveniently enough, this book is a product of the system being advocated. Unless I somehow missed them, many of the comment boxes are either empty or filled with comments by the same hand full of people. To be fair, the work is on a topic that has a very limited audience. But, in reality, does not most historical scholarship fall under this category? Therefore, whom exactly are we advocating to take part in this process of collaboration and open peer review? Perhaps it is the same audience that would otherwise be participating, only this time doing it with a user name instead of anonymously and a few student comments scattered about. 

At the end of the introduction, the authors ask, “Do we really want to know what our readers think?” I would argue that it seems unlikely that real criticism would actually occur. Professional academics, I would assume, would be reluctant to give an openly critical response to a work if their name is attached to the comment. Students, too, would be hesitant to give overly critical feedback if they comment at all. 

Parts two and six from the book seem most relevant for discussion. Part two deals with crowdsourcing, an idea I have been toying around with in my mind for the past couple of weeks. This past summer, I began using a website called duolingo, a crowdsourcing project that aims to translate Wikipedia articles (another crowdsourcing project) from English into other languages. The goal of the creator of the website is make knowledge more accessible to those who are in need of it most. With English being the primary language used for Wikipedia, duolingo’s creator realized it would be impossible for a company or organization to translate all the articles, so he conceived of a plan that would make it possible for crowdsourcing to do the work. After the website teaches the user another language, for free, it allows you to practice by translating Wikipedia documents into whatever language you are learning. It verifies the translation using crowdsourcing techniques. I have wondered if any of these methods have been attempted to alter the peer review process for academics. The current method allows an outside organization to extract unpaid labor from other scholars to review material before publication allowing the publisher sole possession of the profit. With the technology available, it seems odd that this is still the method being used. If scholars already do the bulk of the work for free, why not transition beyond the publishers into a new arena that could potentially rule today’s publishers, especially journal publications, obsolete? Universities and scientific institutions worldwide would save a vast amount of money, allowing more money to be dumped into research and other efforts. But, perhaps I don’t know what I’m talking about here. 

Part six of this week’s readings deals with an issue I think we’ve all considered since the beginning of the semester: who cares and will anyone read or look at my work anyway? The democratization of the web is an idea that has constantly been thrown around throughout the semester. But, I’m not exactly sure how to relate this to historical study. Historians tend to be extremely specialized and I’m not sure how their work, in its current form, can apply to the masses. 

As we walk away from the readings this week, I am becoming more convinced that technology does have a significant role and important future regarding the humanities. I believe the most important goals, however, should be to alter the profit-motives behind academic publication. If a new system could be brought about, I think it would automatically help with the issue of making scholarly work more openly accessible to audiences that are currently restricted (which is the most important issue for me, personally). Also, it is apparent that scholarly work needs to maintain a high quality in order for professional historians to remain legitimate sources. This is also something I think technology can find a way to work out.  
