---
published: true
layout: post
title: Week 10 Lab
author: nhlasley
---

The lab for this week features four resources, each of which relates in differing ways to topics discussed in class the past several weeks.

Firstly, there is [Trove Tools](http://wraggelabs.com/emporium/trove-tools/) -- the home page for a collection of digital tools built for use with the [National Library of Australia's Trove Collection](http://trove.nla.gov.au/?q=) of online materials pertaining to Australian history.  These tools enable the historian to quickly gather the kind of data necessary for undertaking the quantitative analysis advocated by Jockers and Moretti.  Of particular interest to me was the [Query Harvester](http://wraggelabs.com/emporium/trove-tools/harvester/), an open-source program that allows the researcher to quickly gather all of the results from a particular search in the Trove Newspaper database, including the metadata and full text of each article.  The script runs in Python, and instructions for operating it can be found in a [blog post](http://discontents.com.au/mining-the-treasures-of-trove-part-1/) by its creator, Tim Sherratt.  While Trove Tools is only helpful to those utilizing the Trove interface, this kind of specificity is actually an advantage in that it mitigates the potential mistake of feeding data into an interpreter only to create meaningless statistics owing to the noncompatibility of the data and processing algorithm. 

The second resource, [Mapping the Republic of Letters](http://republicofletters.stanford.edu/index.html), is an effort to determine an intellectual networks documenting the transmission of ideas and information during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.  The project thus far has focused on several case studies, centered around prominent intellectuals whose correspondence is still extant.  For the lab, I chose to focus on the [Benjamin Franklin](http://republicofletters.stanford.edu/casestudies/franklin.html) case study.  The data from these letters, including recipients name, gender, and  destination,  along the lines of the kind of projects.  One of the interesting things about this project is the collaboration between several different countries and the combined effort of scholarship.  The Benjamin Franklin Case Study was a team effort, with no less than five members listed in the credits.

The last two resources fall into the simlar category of digital visualizations in the form of maps.  First the [map of Brooklyn, New York](http://bklynr.com/block-by-block-brooklyns-past-and-present/), featured on the BKLYNR website, is an incredible visualization of a map with every building colored according to its date of construction.  While certainly beautiful and I can see the use for scholarship, I found myself asking if this kind of project meets the standards set forth by Jessop in "Digital Visualization as a Scholarly Activity."  For now, I will just leave this as an open ended question.  After looking at the map and reading Jessop's piece, what do you all think?  Does this map meet Jessop's criteria for what qualifies as 'scholastically legit' digital visualization? Why or why not?

Finally there is [Hypercities](http://hypercities.com/), which, according to the introductory video on the website, is " a collaborative research and educational platform for travelling back in time to explore the historical layers of city spaces in an interactive, hyper-media environment."  In contrast to the sparse interface of BKLYNR, which left me wondering as to its use, the interface of Hypercities is so full of things to click on that it is difficult to know where to begin.  My personal favorite feature is the one that allows the user to overlap city maps and adjust the opacity of each.  For a city with longstanding cultural centrality such as Rome, the effort of rendering such a visualization is closer to the parameters of what Jessop defines as "scholarly activity."
