---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Manovich Reflections: TN Saint"
---

	With the rapid rise of the digital era and computer technology many people neglect to place this development within history. It is therefore not strange that Lev Manovich created the Language of New Media, not only to divide the old and new media but also to show the significance and resemblance in history. He does this by using many different examples such as photos, cinema and other art forms.

	The introduction of this book makes perfectly clear what Manovich’s purpose of this book is: “I analyze the language of new media by placing it within the history of modern visual and media cultures.“ (Manovich, 2001, pg. 34). He furthermore explains that to achieve this he will delve deeper into different areas of new visual media and draw upon histories of art, photography and cinema. To do this he will “draw his theoretical frameworks from both the humanities and the sciences, utilizing art history, literary theory, media studies, social theory, and computer science.” (Manovich, 2001, pg. 35).   
    
            Chapter one draws a line between new media and old media. Manovich claims that two trajectories, (computer and media) were now merged. This merge was due to the changing purpose of the computer. Whereas previously the computer was merely used for production, it now became an object of storage, communication and distribution. This eventually led to the digitalisation of the media, where every form of media was translated to numerical data that could be manipulated with computers. Manovich argues that this eventually enabled a mass society to arise: “Mass media and data processing are the complimentary technologies of a modern mass society; they appear together and develop side by side, making this society possible.” (Manovich, 2001, pg. 46). Eventually Manovich establishes that there are five key principles that divide old and new media. The first principle he argues that media objects are a numerical presentation which means that every media is a mathematical algorithm and therefore is manipulable and programmable. Furthermore Manovich argues that media have a modular structure, meaning that every media object that been broken down to small parts and can be altered separately. These two principles cause media to be automatic, causing human interaction with media to decrease. Furthermore media becomes variable, meaning that many different versions can exist of the same particle of media. The last principle, cultural transcoding, holds that because of the intensive usage of the computer, the cultural layer and the computer layer become entwined. Computer concepts are becoming cultural concepts, because of the high significance of the computer processes.  
            
           The next four chapters each show different perspectives on new media. In the second chapter Manovich discusses the interface, which according to him has become problematic. The graphical user interface (GUI) does not differentiate between different forms of media anymore. He argues that content and interface become entwined. He furthermore claims that because the screen, the entrance to the virtual world, is fixed, humans become immobilized. Chapter three looks deeper into the operations of the computer software. He argues that the interface of computers has become a way of thinking for people. Manovich furthermore distinguishes three main operations; selecting, compositing, and teleaction. With selecting he means that media is composed of ready-made parts and not from scratch anymore. Compositing refers to digital selection of elements to create one seamless whole. Teleaction refers to the physical distance with which people are able to access all the information needed. In chapter four Manovich talks about the development of indistinguishable illusion of film technology. He argues that there is an increasing ability to simulate computer images in such a way that they become indistinguishable from photographs. 
           
            Chapter five discusses the different forms of new media. Manovich divides two forms; the database and the navigable space. Although these forms existed already before the digital era, they have now become a dominating force in our cultural society. With the rise of the new digital era, there has been an overflow on data and information. A database and a navigable space (interface) made it possible to organize these immense data. But throughout the last years the database and its navigable space have transcoded into our culture. It has become a representation of human experiences and a life-style. According to Manovich however this perspective only provided one aspect of seeing the world.  Narratives for example provide a cause-effect perspective on the world, which a database does not offer. Manovich claims that “Therefore, database and narrative are natural enemies. Competing for the same territory of human culture, each claims an exclusive right to make meaning out of the world.” (Manovich, 2001, pg. 199). As an example he uses Dziga Vertov’s movie Man with a Movie Camera, which tried to film using different techniques, and then storing them in a database for later use. Manovich argues that a database represents an infinite amount of possibilities whereas navigable space gives the user an infinite amount of ways to access this database. 
            
            In the previous chapters Manovich has used cinema, film and art to explain new media. In this chapter he does the opposite; he argues that new media has provided modern cinema with many features, such as special effects, 3D, digital composing etc. The new films and cinema are adapted to the increasing possibilities that are provided by the new media.
            
             In this book Manovich tries to present a new modern insight into the aspects of new media. He argues that the new media is changing rapidly and that a proper explanation is needed to track its development. To do this, he argues, one must look at the computers. The international character of the new media requires a different approach from multiple fields. For this exact reason Manovich tries to connect and combine the fields of art, media and history into one explanatory book. Manovich is well aware of the vastness of information about the new media, and therefore properly explains each concept and term. Manovich tried to make a parallel connection with the programming of computer and the history and future of cinema. He does this in a relatively simplified way, which is not a problem at all since there are already many technical terms and concepts; concepts which might be too difficult for an average reader. Furthermore Manovich focusses too much on the aspect of artistic elements to represent the new media, which will cause the reader to feel overwhelmed and cause them to lose the red line of the book. Although Manovich’ writing is reasonably understandable, and the subjects he mentions are well-chosen, the thin selection of the massive field of new media that is presented in this book will make the reader a bit skeptical and make them question the academic and scientific value of this book.
             
            Manovich’ book is worth reading for people interested in new media.

