---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Samuel Morse: A \"Bit\" Ahead of his Time"
author: mattblaylock
---

Much of this week’s ready was a challenge for me as I had little background into the subject.  Luckily, Charles Petzold’s Code: The Hidden language of Computer Hardware and Software offered many useful metaphors and examples to help explain code in a way I could understand.  From flashlights to dolphins, Petzold made the harder parts of what exactly computing entailed seem within my realm of comprehension.  Being confronted with the nuts and bolts of how the machines and systems that I use daily actually came into being forced me to conceptualize what I know about the digital itself.  This meant seeing a new side of computer hardware and software, one that included bits, bytes, and my favorite, the occasional nibble.  Although I have taken little applicable knowledge (I can’t imagine myself writing a code anytime soon) from Petzold, I have in fact gained great perspective on computing in general.

Most intriguing for me was Petzold’s examination of the major contributors to computer development.  For example, Samuel Morse played a particularly important role in the development of mass communication through his innovative system of dots and dashes, what became Morse Code.  Morse stood out for me in this work because I have studied him myself, but in a rather different context, as an early republic painter.  For me, Morse represents a man who abandoned painting almost completely to devote his time to scientific pursuits, the leader of which was Morse Code, after having little success in developing a public form of art.  I have often wondered how someone with so much enthusiasm about art, Morse was a huge promoter of the American art movement following the American Revolution, and who had devoted some much time and energy to this pursuit and cause could easily shift into what I have always previously seen as an unrelated field. 

As I began to think about Morse in relation to Petzold, I was reminded of many of the ideas within McLuhan and Manovich as well.  First, I began to think about the media is the message and hot and cold media.  Was the viewership or art a hotter or colder than the sending or receiving of a message?  Did Morse see his code as simply a new area of media to explore?  Could his patriotic message, his desire to promote America’s greatness, and his belief in public communication (originally planned through public art) be more fully realized through mass communication?  Morses’s work relates nicely to the media is the message as his goals never changed, simply the best way to achieve them did.  
I also began to think about how Morse’s enthusiasm for painting was not for the art form itself but rather what he could do with it.  In this way Morse’s evolution seemed to correspond nicely with Manovich’s contention that all media derives from the one preceding it.  Perhaps Morse Code was just an extension of Morse’s work as a painter.  Could Morse Code be easily tied in with art in the development of media?  In this context I believe the connections are actually quite clear.  Returning to the ideas above, Morse was not as concerned with the media as the message.  Therefore, when one was inadequate to get his ideas across, he changed to another. 

