---
published: true
layout: post
title: "A tale of two cities?"
author: jtomlin1
---



Out of all the assigned readings for this week, I wanted my initial post to focus on Cohen and Rosenzweig's Digital History because it ultimately referred me back to my initial reasons for enrolling in the course. As an insecure graduate student hurtling closer to two of the largest "hoops" academics face, the dissertation and the job-market, I entered confident that the course on digital history could prove useful to both. My dissertation will rely on vast amounts of coorespondence, popular writings, and, especially, printed sermons from the eighteenth century Atlantic world. Many of these publications have been digitized, and the prospect of harnessing digital tools to do such things as chart word frequencies in tracts or analyze the quanitity of printed materials on specific topics or positions makes the aspiring dissertator salivate. Similarly, as one familiar with the macabre and sobering job-market speech that opens the academic year in every Humanities graduate program, I understood the value of familiarity with the "new media" in a job climate sure to progressively encourage and reward this skill more and more. 
    
Accordingly, I began Cohen and Rosenzweig's work anticipating many of the advantageous qualities they point out in their introduction. It is fair to say I could not have not so clearly identified them specifically, but things like "interactivity" and "capacity" seem reasonably obvious. Likewise, reading the suspicions of digital media antagonists such as Gertrude Himmelfarb and David Noble pointed to the issues of accuracy and integrity, structurally and institutionally, that historians can easily foresee. That is not to say that Himmelfarb's and Noble's reservations did not give me pause for thought, but only that, as Cohen and Rosenzweig's introduction points out, the benefits seem to outweigh the risks. It was at this point, however, that I reflected on the initial reasons I enrolled in the course.
Ambition.
	
I was excited about the possibilities of what Digital History could do for me. Heretofore my orientation had been completely self-oriented and individualistic on the subject, but it now dawned on me that the interests of the individual are entirely seperable from those of the academic field. In fact, it was in a collective sense that I began to reaccess the dangers C and R mentioned. 1) Presentation: Digital Media offers an ever growing array of formats and mediums from which to present, share, write, and research. But what of the focus on the medium over the information? The opportunities of innovative presentation can easily overshadow a loyalty to the facts themselves. One must serve the other. Art chooses presentation. Crafts choose the product; in this case information. 2) Quality: As Rosenzweig bemoaned, the digital media doesn't always sufficiently differentiate between the amateur and the professional; between vital information and trivium. But we must also question quality in a structural sense. How will Universities justify the expense of professionals who can be replaced by free online forums, lectures, and texts? 3)This leads to the danger of durability, though not in the sense C and R mean. I mean the durability of the professional job market in the face of the "Revolutionary" effects of the internet at a time when the Humanities market has languished for two decades and probably has more suffering to endure yet. 

I am not nearly as cynical as those such as Noble and Rosenzweig on the internet and digital media in a cultural sense. But the stark contrast between the opportunities and the risks of digital history is worth consideration. It is certainly a revolution, as the cyber-enthusiasts predicted, but these things usually have a bit of blowback. And it's almost always unexpected when it hits. Another analogy of the introduction, however, I think is  most pertinent. In describing the meteroic rise in the number of websites, databases, and networks around which historians were able to work, C and R call the new digital environment a "megalopolis." In American pop-culture, the pilgrim to the teeming city either "makes it" in the city by harnessing the opportunities of their new environment while staying true to their core values, or becomes lost in the vastness and indifference of the urban jungle and is swallowed up; seduced by the allure of the new and exciting but unwise to its dangers. Sometimes two different results depend on the individuals. Sometimes, however, they are presented with two very different cities.  The Historical field seems to be that newcomer in the megalopolis. If Cohen and Rosenzweig are attempting to provide a "practical handbook rather than a theoretical manifesto", the megalopolis analogy is espescially relevant; inviting historians to reflect on that which the field can use to "make it" in the new environment without omitting the perils newly presented. 

What does everyone else think? How can we weigh the long-term collective risks/rewards of the new digital environment? How do we differentiate between that which we should allow digital history to innovate or change and those characteristics of the pre-digital environment to which we should cling? 
    												
J. Tomlin