---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Flickr and Wikipedia: A great historical tool or potential blow to the profession? "
---


Flickr and Wikipedia. We’ve all visited these sites, so there’s nothing new here, huh? 

Well, let’s take a look at Flickr first. The homepage is pretty cool—there are lots of pretty pictures. Ohh, there’s an explore option; let’s click it. There’s a cool picture of London, a tiger eating its dinner, and oh, there seems to be a lot of birds. Now, what exactly is this anyway?  Acquired by Yahoo! in 2005, Flickr is an image and video hosting website that allows users and organizations to upload photos. Hosting services such as Flickr provide different kinds of code that allows users to share their photos in a variety of ways. 

I’ll make an account to better understand the way it works. From the user interface perspective, it looks much like any other social media website. I have a terabyte to work with, so I’ll try to fill it up with some photos from my trips to Central America. Take a look at [my photos.](http://www.flickr.com/photos/101607575@N08/)

Since my account is new, I will analyze another account for the purpose of this post until my photos are organized, tagged, etc. Many institutions take advantage of Flickr, so it’s not hard at all to find a collection of photos. In fact, you can look around on your favorite website’s page for the little logo; it typically has one blue and one pink dot to signify Flickr. [The White House’s Flickr page](http://www.flickr.com/photos/whitehouse) is a good place to start.

You can find most of the needed information on the front page. The photo-count and registration date are in the top right corner. The profile picture and links to photo collection sets and favorites can be found to the left. The photostream can be found on the main page. Here, you can click to enlarge, favorite, comment, and share photos. The reason I selected the White House’s page is because it allows us as historians to easily understand the historical relevance of a tool such as Flickr. There probably aren’t 5000 photos in existence of a person like John Quincy Adams, much less pictures that are as easily accessible as these of Barack Obama. Despite this page’s obvious propaganda-styled theme, it allows historians to see into the life of US politics in certain regards. It’s easy to compare tools such as Flickr to the historian’s archive. A digital arena such as Flickr, however, seems to have no visible boundaries and interpretation can become a difficult task. Our field is changing. No longer will books and hand written documents be the only key sources for documenting history—our digital imaginations must keep pace. 

Wikipedia is a tool everyone is probably much more familiar with. This Internet encyclopedia utilizes what is known as a wiki to document its content. Wikis allow users to add, delete, and modify together to create a page of information. A wiki page is editable and can constantly withstand change to improve information and dialogue. Upon first glance, the edit page of a wiki seems complicated, but after familiarizing yourself with the tools, it becomes fairly simple. The “edit” page of the wiki is a raw text file that allows you to contribute to the page. Once you save the your changes, the server changes the marked-up text to HTML and the text becomes a viewable webpage. Creating an account is fairly simple and there is a sandbox feature that members can use to help learn the skills needed to edit and contribute to pages. 

Because Wikipedia is edited and maintained by users, there are both good and bad pages. Wikipedia, for years now, has served as an influential method for obtaining knowledge, especially for young people. Human curiosity intensifies knowledge acquisition quickly on Wikipedia. An innocent search for Nelson Mandela’s birthday can quickly escalate into satisfying that lifelong urge of learning about thermodynamics. This addresses some of the same issues we’ve had in class recently. Wikipedia obviously has a great impact on the minds of the youth, so at what point do the easily edited pages become a problem? Could digital history, in its most basic form, not be summed up as historical articles on Wikipedia? Although professional historians have just as much access to these articles as anyone else, it is apparent their influence is missing on many historically relevant articles. Despite this, many of the articles are good. Does this not contradict some of our major concerns in class?  It’s not necessarily a bad thing that nonprofessionals now have easier access to writing history. 

Each Wikipedia page also has a discussion wiki attached to it. This is where many of the primary concerns are addressed regarding point of view biases, rules violations, potential additions to the page, etc. This aspect of the wiki, in addition to the sourcing requirement, serves as a way to improve quality. 

Our in-class lab will briefly address Flickr before diving into a few Wikipedia articles and, if time permits, the sandbox. Controversial articles will be the easiest to analyze from a historical perspective—sources are everything. I like to keep things interesting, so I’m thinking we’ll review some of the following articles: Karl Marx, Marxism-Leninism, Adam Smith, and capitalism. 

Also, please remember to read the Rosenzweig article on Wikipedia assigned for the week. It will definitely be beneficial when trying to contribute to discussion. 
