---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Macroanalysis: Textual analysis without the reader?"
author: radiationturnip
---

Mathew Jockers begins his recent work, Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History, with an anecdote. As a young graduate student he debated a geologist about the merits of research in the humanities, during which he defended his field against the charge that the work it produced was inherently subjective and anecdotal. His younger self argued that literary methodology was “in essence no different from the scientific one”, being centered around a hypothesis which is then verified, altered, or rejected based on “evidence” (5).  While the author claims that the intervening years have made this an only “slightly” embarrassing story, the book that follows reveals an author who, while perhaps more mature and measured in his language, still longs for a literary methodology that is less subjective and anecdotal, one able, in fact, to produce “verifiable results.”

The book is divided into three sections, and in the first section, “Foundation”, Jockers defends digital methods against those in the humanities who would still question their utility.  According to the author, the main research method that literary historians have typically employed is sustained, concentrated reading of texts or “close reading” (6). As no research project is able to account for everything, samples are chosen that the literary historian then uses to make larger conclusions about the whole. Until recently there have been relatively few alternatives to this method. However, the ubiquity of what Jockers calls “big-data” has dramatically changed the “sampling game.” By “big-data” the author means ever growing digital libraries and computers with the computational power to crunch large numbers and run meaningful analyses of their contents. 

For the author this paradigm shift is significant, because literary historians *are*, in fact, trained in highly subjective and anecdotal ways. They are trained to be close readers who carefully pore over texts and note “things”, and these “things” are used as the evidence with which they stitch together an argument. Jockers describes this method as “random”, and while acknowledging that it still has some use, argues that it is no longer sufficient. Rather, texts must be understood in context, and “big-data” allows us to do this in the biggest of contexts, that being “everything else” that exists (8). He argues that seminal works should not be studied in isolation, but should be evaluated in terms of how they fit into the literary or intellectual “economy” in which they were produced. 

Despite the potential offered by digital methods, Jockers concedes that the field has been slow to adopt these techniques. He claims that the two primary reasons are: 1) “the disciplinary habit of thinking small” which he attributes to the emphasis on individual texts. Such scholars are able to see *some* utility in digital methods, but only to the degree they are able to facilitate methods they are already familiar with, 2)a lack of technical expertise. Even among those scholars who might be open to new approaches, many find the perceived hurdles too intimidating to give digital methods a try (17). Jockers describes his work as a “call to arms” to both camps, because only by integrating micro and macro-forms of analysis will literary historians be able to make truly meaningful claims about the past. 

In part 2, “Evidence”, Jockers provides several examples of types of studies that such integration offers. In his most detailed example, he argues that macroanalysis undercuts one of the fundamental assumptions of 20th century Irish-American literature, that Irish-Americans suffered what one critic called “cultural amnesia” between 1900-1940.  As this theory went, a dramatic decrease in the number of novelists writing in an explicit way about being Irish in America indicated a loss of cultural identity. For Jockers, however, this is a prime example of poor methodology. In his macro-study on the topic, he claims that the decrease was regional more than ubiquitous. While there was a dip in Irish-American work in the traditional publishing centers in the Northeast, “big-data” shows no such decline among western authors. The author describes this as an example of a poor sample being used to describe the whole, an error that methods of macro-analysis can correct. Moreover, in the remaining chapters he describes the ways digital techniques can be used to identify, among other things, style markers. These markers can then be used to plot the intersection of things like gender, nationality and theme as they manifest themselves in literature. 

While there was much I admired about this work, and I find Jockers’ call to arms ultimately compelling, the manner in which he does so reveals a disciplinary myopia that seems all too common among literary scholars. While it may be that scholars in literature departments are trained to conduct research where they “randomly” look for “things”, this is not how everyone in the humanities is taught. For historians, to name one discipline, context is key to everything we do. While it’s true that we have our seminal works, these are only ever meaningful in terms of their larger context, and historians and other scholars have labored to develop methods to balance the very macro and micro issues that Jockers finds so novel. Clearly, none of these are perfect, and it is for this reason that digital methods offer so much potential, but Jockers enthusiasm is undermined by, what seems at least, to be a lack of understanding for how other disciplines do things. 

Moreover, Jockers enthusiasm for a literary methodology that is more “verifiable” often leads to charts, graphs and analyses that appear “science-ish”, but upon closer examination don’t really mean anything. His chart on p. 43 for example, shows Irish-American fiction “per capita” divided between east and west. While he offers some explanation for how his calculations were made, he left this reader ultimately unclear as to what *exactly* counted as *Irish-American* fiction, and how he determined *per-capita*, a failure that renders his broader claims highly dubious. 

Even more critically, he completely neglects any broader consideration of the relationship between readers and writers. While it *may* be true that there were fewer authors writing *Irish-American* fiction in the East, this tells us nothing about the number of people who were reading the work that was being published. It may be that the East had fewer authors, but that their position in more dense urban centers allowed their work to be more widely disseminated.  This is important information, because no text is meaningful in a vacuum. We can only determine a given text’s cultural impact and role in the intellectual and literary “economy” if we know the degree to which anyone actually read it. To use Jockers’ metaphor, it would be like studying the economy while ignoring any consideration of the people who actually spend the money, use the resources, and produce the products that cause it to flow.  

Indeed, Jockers fails to acknowledge that readers are perhaps *the* crucial component of literary history, and it is for this reason that certain texts have been prioritized over others. The invention of the printing press allowed for an explosion in textual production, but not every text is equal, and some *have* been more culturally relevant than others. Sometimes relevance is determined by a texts survival over space and time –Dickens and Twain-, and sometimes by sheer volume –Dan Brown -. In both cases it is readers that make these culturally significant.  This is not to say that historians should not take the mass of more “forgettable” texts into account, but some texts do deserve more sustained and concentrated study, and this is anything but “random.” 


Enter text in [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/). Use the toolbar above, or click the **?** button for formatting help.
