---
published: true
layout: post
title: "Narrativity: Image vs Imagination"
author: jtomlin1
---


Narrativity in imagination vs imagery

I was struck by the strong dichotomy presented in two of the depictions of the meanings and uses of narrative in this week’s readings. Hayden White in The Value of Narrativity in the Representation of Reality explains to us that not only do narratives offer the ability to transcend cultural and social boundaries of language and meaning, but they in some sense act to “translate knowing into telling.” As history students, we have often debated the narrative within monographs; seeking to critique or praise the ability of the author to “make sense” of a large data set and complicated, often interdependent, events, persons, and places in time. According to Hayden, the value of narrativity in the representation of real events originates in the desire of the historian, or scholar, to have real events display the kind of interconnectivity, relativity, meaning, and effect that we each tend to see in world events. Namely, we wish to articulate the connections or patterns we seek between cause and effect; between objects in motion and objects at rest, so to speak. 

However, the Visual History of Germany visual narrative complicates this view quite a bit. In this article, the author suggests that images themselves, rather than the written word, can be used to create an equally cogent and meaningful “conceptual and associative connection”. Just as the written narrative seeks to do, this applies a “design upon sources” based on sequence, but rather devoid of necessarily transparent linear or logical connections. The images themselves don’t impart connectivity as much as they juxtapose obviously related realities. The story is there. The interpretive analysis is present as well. And yet we seem to be side stepping the kind of trans-cultural, trans-linguistic attributes that Hayden assigns to traditional narrativity. My first reaction is that this does not qualitatively alter the value of narrative itself; instead rearranging the sequence from which the audience arrives at the predestined conclusions hinted, or even explicitly provided, by the author. I do, however, get the feeling that at a certain point this becomes to separate games; One which relies upon logical and linear sequences to chart an “imaginary truth” to events and the other which eschews linearity and logic in favor of visceral, personal presumptions-that is to say one provides a narrative, and the other allows you to create your own from a basic outline. What does everyone else think? Are we talking about two different things? Or are we simply rethinking the process by which we construct narratives without substantively altering the nature of the product?  