---
published: true
layout: post
title: Fog of War
author: mattblaylock
---

In _Fog of War_, a documentary film starring Robert Strange McNamara, best known for his position as Secretary of Defense during the presidencies of John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, director Errol Morris asks McNamara to reflect on his controversial career.  The result is the development of  eleven lessons from McNamara’s life: lesson 1: empathize with your enemy, lesson 2: rationality will not save us, lesson 3: there's something beyond oneself, lesson 4: maximize efficiency, lesson 5: proportionality should be a guideline in war, lesson 6: get the data, lesson 7: belief & seeing are both often wrong, lesson 8: be prepared to re-examine your reasoning, lesson 9: in order to do good, you may have to engage in evil, lesson 10: never say never, lesson 11: you can't change human nature.  These lessons seem less the ideas of McNamara as they are a few of many comments regarding his insights following his career and more the work of the film-maker as he attempts to organize McNamara’s reflections into an organized grouping.  Despite the artificial nature of these lessons, they known-the-less reflect McNamara’s thoughts and are revealing of his beliefs about the intersection of political decision making and computation.

Because McNamara’s career was drawn from his academic excellence in economics (as well as mathematics and philosophy), McNamara focused strongly on the ability to utilize statistical and computational analysis as a means of decision making.  He applied this policy to a career in management, such as a brief presidency over Ford Motor Company, as well as to his involvement in WWII and Vietnam.  This raises the question if McNamara’s approach to U.S. military policy was an instance of technocracy.  It appears that it clearly was.  McNamara was operating almost solely on analysis of data to formulate his decisions in both cases.  The result was telling as McNamara’s own lessons seem to highlight both the usefulness of his initial approaches, but also how and why they can’t operate successfully without larger understandings of a situation.  

Consider lesson 7.  This lesson perhaps best demonstrates how data analysis cannot always prove successful in a wartime situation.  McNamara makes this clear when he explains how Americans and Vietnamese were unable to understand one another.  Because of this initial and lasting confusion, McNamara’s use of data to formulate military decisions was flawed.  Because an important aspect of the analysis was wrong, motivation, all subsequent decisions were inherently wrong as well.  In this way, McNamara provides a convincing argument that a technocracy, if taken to the extreme, is imperfect.  McNamara’s reflections are not condemning the use of computational analysis, or even of the results of his misguided decision making, but rather a realistic reflection on how all data analysis must also consider larger human and situational influences.  It is in this manner that the title of the film becomes revealing.  _The Fog of War_ demonstrates not only McNamara’s literal explanation of how war makes decisions clouded, but also functions as a larger metaphor of how data analysis alone cannot fully explain any event.

McNamara’s history is useful when considering how to approach the possibilities of technology within historical methodology.  Most important is the need to understand how data analysis, made extremely accessible in ever increasing numbers, cannot answer any historical questions without a larger historical analysis and deeper considerations.  This merging of data and existing historical ideas presents an exciting and useful period of historical analysis as each help more fully explain the other.
