---
published: true
layout: post
title: Protocol
author: mattblaylock
---

In Protocol: How Control Exists after Decentralization Alexander R. Galloway examines the internet and how, despite an ideology expressing freedom, it is a very regulated and controlled environment.  The key to this regulation is protocol, what Galloway describes as “a set of rules
which defines a technical standard” (76).  This underlying definition leads Galloway to the main argument of his work:  “I argue that the Internet is distributed not decentralized and that it is in fact highly controlled despite having few if any central points of control” (25).  Galloway identifies the means of this control through the specific aspects of the internet’s protocol, including HTTP, TCP/IP, and HTML.  Because users are forced to respond to these internet protocols, the very interactions, changes, and connections to the internet are from the outset controlled.

Galloway does a superb job of demonstrating how the very emergence of the internet led to this continued level of control.  For example, by explaining that the internet’s initial reason for being was related to the need to decentralize information during the Cold War Era, it becomes easy to see how decentralization does not equate a new form of total freedom.  Clearly, controls were put in place, just in new forms.  However, Galloway is careful to differentiate the beginnings of the internet and its current incarnation.  Galloway posits that the internet “gains its authority from another place, from technology itself and how people use it” (122).  Therefore, the nature of the internet has changed drastically as its availability has expanded.  Galloway explains that now “protocol is an affective, aesthetic force that has control over life itself ” (81).   In this sense, the internet is in essence a place for multiple groups to interact, each with differing agendas and ideals of what the internet is, should be, and how to respond to those beliefs.  Galloway recognized this by arguing that resistance to the control of the internet continues and has had a long and varied past.

This leads Galloway into the most compelling aspect of his analysis as he examines the way multiple groups utilize the internet to realize points of freedom and expression.  These points of resistance are defined by hackers, which Galloway explains are often thought of as explorers or terrorists based on time and context, and their pursuit of tactical media.  Galloway explains “tactical media as those phenomena that are able to exploit flaws in protocological and proprietary command and control, not to destroy technology, but to sculpt protocol and make it better suited to people’s real desires” (176).  Therefore, tactical media comprises many different types of expression, including computer viruses, cyberfeminism, and even internet art.  What is unique to these examples is Galloway’s hesitance to either categorize them as either positive or negative.  What is universal about all of them is their relationship to protocol itself and how they most respond to it before any real ideology can be expressed.  

This leaves Galloway’s overall point of view about protocol ambiguous.  It becomes difficult to determine exactly what Galloway feels about the true interconnections between protological groups and those working in opposition to them.  Galloway makes this ambivalence clear when he explains that “My goal here in this book has been not to come down cleanly and say that protocol is either good or bad- because clearly it is both, in varying degrees and context- but rather to chart some of protocol’s distinctive characteristics so that any concerned person can better decide how to evaluate and critique a given protocological technology in a specific historical context” (246).  Perhaps Galloway makes his belief about protocol most clear when he explains it in relation to ideology.  Galloway posits that “protocol then becomes more and more coextensive with humanity’s productive forces, and ultimately becomes the blueprint for humanity’s innermost desires about the world and how it ought to be lived” (245).  This leaves the reader with questions about Galloway’s overall argument.  Returning to the beginning of this post, I would ask if Galloway’s subheading is justified by his conclusion.  Does control exist after decentralization or is the very act of reacting against control a sign that it is nonexistent?  
