---
published: true
layout: post
title: The Problem of Definitions
---


After reading the assigned articles for this week, I began to consider my relationship to digital humanities.  As I mentioned in our introductory class, I have very little knowledge of technology and restrict my computer usage to using word, email, and occasionally searching the internet.  However, the possibilities the digital humanities offer me as a researcher are vast and easily accessible.  Therefore, why have a continued to distance myself from the field?
The answer seems to lie in many of the thoughtful considerations posed in the first part of Debates in Digital Humanities, “Defining the Digital Humanities.” Consider what Lisa Spiro identified as an underlying problem of this emerging field in her article, ‘“This Is Why We Fight”: Defining the Values of the Digital Humanities. “’  Spiro proposes that, “Even as the digital humanities (DH) is being hailed as the ‘next big thing,’ members of the DH community have been debating what counts as digital humanities and what does not, who is in and who is out, and whether DH is about making or theorizing, computation or communication, practice or politics.”  For me, this statement concisely summarizes why I haven’t felt compelled to consider myself as part of this “next big thing” despite the fact I easily view it as an important aspect of a newly emerging historical process.  The main issue lies in the problem over definition.  I often utilize digital humanities in research pursuits; however, I have rarely considered them as a marker of my entry into the digital humanities.  I’m an observer, but not a participant.  I have ignored some of the larger issues that the ability to utilize digital sources means because I have restricted my participation on a misinformed definition of the field.  This is why Sprio’s contention that a “core set of values” are necessary for the field to flourish.
For Sprio, “by creating a core set of values, the digital humanities community may be able to unite to confront challenges such as the lack of open access to information and hidebound policies that limit collaboration and experimentation.”  This statement demonstrates much of the problem I have had in identifying myself as part of the digital humanities.  Quite simply, I didn’t really know what it was.  I felt that to be a full-fledged member of this discipline an advanced knowledge of computing was necessary.  Therefore, my utilization of source material was not adequate to include me within this field.  By understanding more about what digital humanities means, I have been opened to a new understanding of what my own research and historical process involves and have a new found interest is exactly how I can participate in digital the humanities.
Despite Spiro’s ability to challenge my misconceptions of the field, I find her values lacking and ultimately I am unable to fully commit to her point.  Spiro restricts her values to openness, collaboration, collegiality and connectedness, diversity, and experimentation.  Although these are all valid when applied to the digital humanities, are they unique enough to really serve as foundational principles for an often debated discipline?  I believe they are not.  Without the subsequent paragraph of explanation Spiro offers, they seem easily applicable to any academic field.  This is problematic for two reasons.  The first problem is that these values fail to resolve the problem Sprio first posed.  If an essay is required to explain what her values mean when applied specifically to the digital humanities, they can’t function as a clarifying force for the digital humanities as no shorthand definition is developed.  
The second problem is more severe.  If the values Spiro generates are the same as those applied to any academic field, is the digital humanities new or simply an old academic debate in a new form?  If the values Spiro identifies are the same as, let’s say cultural history (my own field), is the very problem I identified in the beginning of this post really resolved?  Can you truly be a full participant in the digital humanities if you don’t contribute to the technological aspects of it or are you simply a user of them but tied to a different field altogether?  
