---
published: true
layout: post
title: Week 11 Lab
author: mattblaylock
---

The goal of Invisible Australians: Living under the White Australia Policy is to expose an oft forgotten part of Australia’s past, the White Australia Policy.  This policy essentially made Australia a white country and worked to discriminate against the millions of Australians who were not of European decent, not only including their indigenous population, but also the “Chinese, Japanese, Indians, Afghans, Syrians and Malays” who lived in the country.  The site is useful as it compiles the myriad of government sources which apply to the White Australian Policy and how it relates to specific biographies of non-white residents.  In this way “The Invisible Australians project will use biographical information found in the records to link together their lives, revealing the real face of White Australia.”

This goal is accomplished through the practical applications of the site.  The first is an extensive archive which allows for research.  To begin a more random search, a user is able to click on the Faces tab.  This will provide a random display of non-white Australians.  If you click on a face, the source material about the individual will appear as well as its corresponding location within the archives.  What is most unique about this aspect of the site is how the faces themselves were compiled from the archives.  In fact, “these portraits were extracted from a range of government documents using a face detection script.”  This allowed the site to search for particular facial characteristics and come up with non-white individuals.

For users with a more specific research goal in mind, the Resources tab allows for more directed research.  Within this tab are multiple options for searching: Repositories, Series, Items, Identities, Names.  These options allow a researcher to explore the archives in numerous ways and find the best search option for their particular enquiry.  The two leading repositories utilized are   National Archives of Australia and the State Records Authority of New South Wales.  From these the site has categorized the relevant materials to match the search options.  In addition, the site offers access to the Invisible Australians Zotero library which is perhaps the best option for a detailed search enquiry as this resources is more easily manipulated to a specific search.

One of the most interesting aspects of the site is its blog.  This allows researchers to respond to the process of their search, their intentions, and their original motivations.  In this way the site is developing a community of scholars, be they academic or amateur, who are actively engaging and learning about the White Australia Policy.  This in turn fosters the very goal of the overall site, to turn a relatively unknown history into a known history.

The Valley of the Shadow site is similar to the previous one in its ability to trace a specific historical topic and to provide a useful interface for research.  In this instance the site’s aim is two communities during the Civil War era (John Brown’s raid to Reconstruction), one northern (Franklin County, Pennsylvania) and the other southern (Augusta County, Virginia).
The site is divided roughly chronologically allowing a user to choose either The Eve of War (Fall 1859 10 Spring 1861), The War Years (Spring 1861 to Spring 1865), and The Aftermath (Spring 1865 to Fall 1870).  Each of these categories offer a visitor access to a sample of sources.  Each category is applicable for the timeframe in question.  Therefore, for The Eve of War you can view the 1860 census and for the Aftermath the 1870 census.  The most appealing aspect of this site it its comparable nature.  Because its intent was to provide a north/south comparison, it works well when applied in this manner.  For instance, for each subtopic you choose, you are given a link to the individual county sources, a search option, and informational about link.  This really allows you to work with the archives themselves as well as understand the process of its inception and development.  

For example, if you are interested in letters and diaries, the about tab tells your that “Through collaboration with the Electronic Text Center at the University of Virginia, the Valley of the Shadow Letters and Diaries collection has been coded in Extensible Markup Language (XML), making them completely searchable. A few collections include digital images of the letter or diary.”  The site goes on to explain how best to search within this category.  The result is a very user friendly and easily manipulated site.

The last site, September 11th Digital Archive, is a site devoted to collecting, sharing, and responding to the materials associated with the September 11th attack.  Much like the previous two sites, the site offers numerous ways to utilize their sources.  It specifically names three main avenues for use: Browse, Research, and Contribute.     The Browse option allows a user to view a myriad of source material catalogued based on source type.  These include stories, email, documents, images, digital animation, interviews, and audio/visual.  In addition to finding materials in this manner, a user can also utilize the search option to help direct their enquiry in specific direction.  

The most interesting aspect of the site is its focus on compiling information through the multiple avenues for visitor contributions.  The site allows users to not only view materials, but also provide their own within the same categories listed above.  This marks a departure from the other two sites as although they were both creating a community of users, this site is the most user driven.  This also separates its source base form the other two because it is reliant on contributions.  This makes the site similar to an oral history project as its main aim is not making source availability located within a different location open to the public, but rather to foster the collection of the data in the first place.
 