---
published: true
layout: post
title: ""
author: nhlasley
---

# Digital Project #

My digital project will be a collection of curated digital objects published on Omeka.net.  These items will consist of digitized textual materials including maps, photographs, and documents pertaining to the town of Soddy Daisy, Tennessee.   Although the exact scope of the collection will depend on the quantity/quality of resources I can find, my initial focus will be on the coal mining, pottery, and hosiery mill industries which employed large numbers of the town's inhabitants in the early twentieth century.  Another important subject in this collection will be the construction of the Chickamauga reservoir in 1938 and its subsequent effects on the regional topography.  A final point of interest is the town's social and economic stability (or lack thereof) during the Great Depression and the role of the WPA in providing work for unemployed.  

The materials from this collection will include descriptive metadata and when necessary, captions to explain the context and add significance.  The textual materials for this curated collection will come from a variety of sources.  After checking into any potential copyright issues, I hope to digitize several resources from the UT libraries special collections and maps services.  Another source will be newspaper clippings and photographs from my personal collection and family archives.  Finally, the bulk of material for digitization will come from the personal collection of Steve Smith.  As the the self-appointed historian of Soddy-Daisy, Smith has accumulated an extensive collection of primary source materials of all shapes and sizes over a number of years.  Although not a professionally trained historian or archivist, Smith has taken remarkable care of the documents that have come into his possession, to the extent that, in many cases he can provide the provenance for any item/collection of items in his holdings.  

This collection will be of value for researchers interested in the history of TVA projects, the Great Depression in small towns, small-scale coal mining operations in the American South, or East Tennessee in general.  It should also be something that personal researchers may have some interest in.  Since the city lacks a cultural institution such as a museum or an archives of its own, this project can be regarded as a quasi-official digital exhibit.  My hope is that the juxtaposition of these digitized collection, the physical items are separated by a great distance, will enable a more comprehensive picture of the city of Soddy-Daisy.

To be considered a success, this collection will include a minimum of 25 digitized objects of 3 or more record types (e.g. photographs, legal documents, maps, etc.) each of which will contain as much descriptive metadata as possible.

# Print Project #

My print project will be a traditional journal article that incorporates text-mining and quantitative formal analysis as supporting evidence.  In particular, I will focus on the early settlement of the State of Tennessee by Southern Veterans of the Revolutionary War and their families.  The corpus of text for this topic will be a collection of transcriptions of Revolutionary War Pension Files overseen by the [Southern Campaign of the American Revolution Fellowship](http://www.southerncampaign.org/), but hosted on its own [url](http://revwarapps.org/).

While over 17,000 transcribed documents are available on the website, my focus will be on a small subset of 923 transcripts which correspond to documents viewable online from the [Virginia Memory project](http://www.virginiamemory.com/collections/collections_a_to_z) of the Library of Virginia.  These documents were chosen because of the more manageable size as well as for the fact that the manuscripts from which they were taken are already digitized and accessible on line.  I will run the MALLET topic-modeling software on this smaller collection of transcripts to determine a list of keywords.  The results will then be assessed from a variety of angles, following very closely the methodology enumerated in Jocker's  *Macroanalysis*.  Also, depending on my findings, I may choose to run MALLET again on the even smaller subset of only those transcripts in which the word "Tennessee" appears.

The results of this study will then be evaluated in the broader context of historiography on the early settlement of East Tennessee and the migration of Revolutionary War Veterans in the American South.  In addition, to achieve a complimentary balance between the "bird's eye view" which topic modeling allows for and the more granular approach of traditional historical research, I will perform close readings of a some small number of the transcripts.  This project seeks to capitalize on the existence of a large corpus of transcribed eighteenth century manuscripts that may or may not be overlooked by the scholarly community due to the websites lack of non-academic affiliation.  Ultimately, a topic-modeling of depositions and statements of Revolutionary War Veterans will yield results that are important for one of two reasons -- to either corroborate the conclusions of existing scholarship or to suggest the need for its revision.  My paper will defend whichever conclusion the data points to.

The inspiration for this project came from the work of Sharon Block and Paul Newman in their Topic-Modeling of the Pennsylvania Gazette and which is discussed in their article ["Doing More with Digitization"](http://www.common-place.org/vol-06/no-02/tales/)