---
published: true
layout: post
title: ""
author: charleswalton2013
---

## Final Reflection 

I do not think I am alone when I say this semester brought many unique challenges. Of course we were up for the readings, but the other components? Well, I must say I enjoyed all of the illuminating moments, as well as some of the frustrating ones. 

My final project experienced quite a few changes throughout the semester. Originally, I wanted to find a place to showcase my own thoughts on an historical moment while simultaneously offering a resource dedicated to providing materials and sources. Omeka, at first, seemed like the best place for that. Unfortunately, the further I got into the process, the more I realized the format of the website just was not a good fit for what I wanted to do. Next, I poked around with Flickr again. Inspired by our image storytelling activity earlier in the semester, I thought I could do something innovative and thought provoking. Once I started to feel as if I had created a nice and silly looking digital comic book, I decided to scrap the idea since there seemed to be no way to incorporate necessary context. 

Originally, I wanted to stay away from WordPress since I used it in the past in one of Dr. Black’s courses. To my surprise, once I finally decided to play around with the website again, quite a bit had changed with its format. Perhaps because I had not visited the website in so long, it seemed to be much different this time around. The format and user-friendly features made the website feel more real opposed to a simple stream of blogs. 

The goal of my project was (is) simple and it is influenced by my original interest in the course—making knowledge more accessible. Digital tools have much to offer the humanities and social sciences. In addition to the benefits to our respective fields, we also can use these evolving tools to bring more knowledge to the masses as a whole. I think my project has the potential to be developed, especially after playing around more with the format, into a project that can serve as a resource for scholars and the community alike to find materials and information on the urban US in the post-Civil Rights era. Although my project is still lacking in many areas, I think I can ultimately develop it into a place that is welcoming of more information and debate. Also, as a student with interests in the twentieth century, I think it is imperative to be able to utilize visualization in understanding the sources. I believe WordPress is an appropriate method to use when trying to provide a reader with those components, as well a historical narrative. 


For the purpose of my project, I used the Black Panther Party as my primary topic within the post-Civil Rights era. There are few websites dedicated to providing scholarly materials and sources on the Panthers. [BlackPanther.org](BlackPanther.org) is the official website of the Dr. Huey P. Newton Foundation. A few years after Newton’s death, his wife Fredrika Newton, along with David Hillard established the foundation. Although the website has a great amount of potential, not much space has been dedicated to sources or history. Bobby Seale, the Panthers’ other founder, also has his own webpage at bobbyseale.com. This website is more informative, but its layout is not as user-friendly. As we learned earlier in the semester, a website’s format and presentation can be a make-or-break issue. Marxists.org offers a very informative page on the Black Panther Party and it is filled with [sources. ](http://www.marxists.org/history/usa/workers/black-panthers/). My major issue with it, however, is its extreme devotion to narrative and lack of innovative elements. Frankly, there is not much here that could not be found in a printed book. 

With my project, I attempted to provide a space for narrative while trying to not take away from alternative methods for presenting sources. My project currently has eight pages for viewing, two being the “about” and “welcome” sections. I wanted to use these for explaining about myself as well as the purpose of the project. I also wanted to explain my interests into the broader historical context, hence the welcome page. The remaining six sections have been divided into two main categories: sources and narrative. The narrative pages are dedicated to the historical processes that led up to the post-Civil Rights era in the urban US. The intro to this section discusses the differences between the Civil Rights Movement and the aftermath that some historians label the Black Power Movement. I discuss the differences in ideology, geography, and economics. There are also many videos in this section because it provides even more context to the topic. I believe that with a little more expansion, it can be a very informative presentation. The next section places the Panthers, my primary topic, into a transnational context. This is where I begin to argue that the Panthers were a part of a larger and global movement that characterized the twentieth century as a result of the expansion of capitalism. My final narrative section is dedicated to Fred Hampton and the relationship between violence and US capitalism. For now, I have left this more historical, but later, I would like to add some theoretical components that discuss the lower class’s contributions to capitalism and how violence has been inseparable to the development. 

The last three sections: speeches, photos, and sources, are an attempt to compile many of the sources that exist relating to radicalism in the US’s slums and ghettos. This aspect definitely has the potential to be an ongoing project while contributing to some scholarly discussion. 

Finally, I would like to say that I really gained a substantial amount of knowledge this semester relating to a topic that I previously did not have much interest in. Perhaps we can work on figuring out the future of publishing as a group project for the next go-round? Anyway, check out my WordPress as I continue to expand it: http://charlesdwalton.wordpress.com/ 
